they can do an MRI on your pectorals and
determine with statistical significance,
so with a 95% confidence, what your one
rep maximum of your bench press is just
by doing an MRI on your
pectoral. So, a bigger muscle is a
stronger muscle for the most part,
period. However, what I'm telling you is
kind of a
[Music]
hack. If you have trouble putting on
muscle as fast as you want, you're at
the right place. My name is Dr. John
Jquish and I'm gonna help. Today I'm
going to talk about variable resistance.
I need to explain, at least do a brief
summary of what variable resistance is.
Now, full disclaimer, I have a variable
resistance product, but the science of
variable resistance has a really
spectacular history that most people do
not know about. So let me tell you first
how I came to the conclusion of variable
resistance. So my background I'm a
doctor of biomedical engineering and
about 15 years ago I developed a system
of building bone density that's now
called osteorrong. It happens in
franchise clinics. There are 300 clinics
around the world in 15 different
countries. So it's a big successful
business that went great. And the way it
worked is we would take positions where
people would normally absorb high impact
forces. So if I'm gonna trip and fall,
I'm gonna put my hands in front of me
and the back of the hand, to be
specific, if I have time to react, the
back of the hand will be in line of the
clavicle and there'll be a 120° angle
from upper to lower arm. So I can either
absorb or produce the greatest amount of
force in that position. also hands close
together about shoulder width. So when
producing these devices and doing the
clinical trials that were associated
with proving that these things work when
I would so there there was there was a
clinical trial that was done through the
University of East London in uh in
England and so I had to go there make
sure that the physicians who were the
investigators were using the product
correctly. That's really all you're
allowed to do when you're the inventor
of something or you're involved with a
company. Just make sure that if they're
running a test that they run the test
correctly and follow and understand how
the device works. So when I went there,
all the doctors were saying this is an
incredible amount of force we're putting
through the human body. So the
population was post-menopausal females
who have never worked out before. So
they started off very weak and they
built
incredible I don't want to call it
exactly strength because they're just
exercising in a very specific position
for bone but they ended up with their
lower extremities creating beyond six
multiples of body weight and that was
the minimum that they were dealing with.
Now they of course they didn't start off
that way but the point that I the
observation I made was that human beings
are really powerful in that powerful
range of motion that stronger range of
motion. Now the anabolic positions where
we want to go to fatigue where basically
every set of weightlifting ever
stimulated anybody was back here in the
stretch range of motion. But you have to
exhaust
first before you can get to that
exhaustion in the weaker range of
motion. Now, I understood how much more
powerful we were in these optimized
positions and I thought, "Wow, that
makes weightlifting kind of a lousy
stimulus because really when you lift
weights, you pick whatever weight you
can handle in the weakest position,
which really means anything outside of
right here is kind of meaningless if you
think about it. Especially because seven
times stronger here than here. Well, if
you pick a weight that you can handle
here, it's really kind of easy the rest
of the time. Well, so what we needed was
a weight that's relevant through the
entire range of motion. So heavier here,
maybe kind of in the middle, and maybe a
little bit lighter here because then we
can go to fatigue and diminishing range.
So I had this thought and I wondered I
wonder if there's anything out there
that's like that's like this. Has
anybody tried training in a way where
they put more resistance where they're
more powerful, less resistance, where
they're less powerful for a more
complete exhaustion? Turned out there
was a whole library of literature on
this subject. It was called variable
resistance. And I came across a guy
named Louis Simmons. Louis Simmons
started a gym in Columbus, Ohio called
Westside Barbell. Now, Westside Barbell,
they used variable resistance. So they
would put some weight on the on the bar
and then they put a bunch of bands and
they were training powerlifters. So if
you were far away from your powerlifting
meet, you had a lot of bands and a tiny
amount of weight. And that ratio changed
as you got closer to your event because
ultimately they were training people to
lift raw weight, not banded weight.
However, the most growth happens when
they had more banding than regular
weight. And I came to the conclusion
ultimately that as long as the bottom or
stretched position is loaded, it doesn't
make a difference if it's banding or if
it's weight. What we do want, and
there's research that I will put in the
description that demonstrates that when
you have a higher ratio from bottom to
top, you get more growth. So great. So,
we want to really focus on banded
tension and not dead weight tension. So,
looking at all of the literature and
everything that Louis Simmons produced
at Westside Barbell, and by the way,
Westside Barbell has more world records.
This is one location, one gym. The
athletes that have come out of there
have broken more world records than any
country on earth, including the United
States. And they now work with me in X3.
and their programming is focused on
variable resistance with X3 with all the
professional athletes they work with,
which is almost the entirety of the NFL,
some of the NBA, and a lot of mixed
martial artists. So, I realized that we
could approach this in a much better
way. So, variable resistance. So, I
looked towards how would I get the
heaviest of banding possible? How would
we load the body so that we optimize
muscle growth and have the absolute
minimum amount of joint risk? You the
only way to eliminate joint risk
completely is do nothing. That's
obviously not something we're going to
do cuz we want results. So this is
maximizing results, minimizing the
downsides of weightlifting like joint
injury, even soreness. So when
exercising like this, you'll be
surprised that you're never sore. Well,
you're never creating any damage. Also,
I'm going to bust a myth right here.
Muscle damage has nothing nothing to do
with growth. In fact, when you damage
the muscle, when you create micro tears
or or however the damage is described,
that actually gives you less of a growth
result as opposed to more because first
your body needs to attenuate the damage,
then growth happens after that, if at
all. So you don't want to damage the
muscle. You want to stimulate the
muscle. Two different things as we
approach loading the body optimally. The
first few repetitions, you hit a heavy
weight here. So like when I do a chest
press, and I've developed to this point,
but when I'm doing a chest press, I'm
holding 550 lb here. But as I lower it,
it's 300 lb here. And as I go down even
further, it might be like 200 lb or 175
lbs. Now, as I'm doing this exercise,
eventually I just can't get to the top
anymore. So, I go to fatigue and then I
shorten the range of motion and go to
fatigue again. And then I can't get
there and I go to fatigue again. That's
called diminishing range. So, variable
resistance with diminishing range. Very
important. Now, of course, the
diminishing range is really going to
focus on building muscular size just as
opposed to muscular power. So, and
you'll see this through the Westside
barbell programming, which is just about
to launch. When you stop short, when you
don't do the diminishing range, what you
do is you really have a more central
nervous system effect. So, you're able
to fire more muscle. it will keep you
more powerful with less body weight. But
if you then do the diminishing range and
shorten your reps as you're doing, then
that's going to be very hypertrophic.
That's going to focus on high amounts of
growth. So depending on what your
approach is. So like if you're a fighter
and you need to stay in a weight class,
you want to focus on being explosive,
you go to fatigue in the stronger range
of motion and then stop. But if you want
to build more size, which will
ultimately get you more strength, cuz a
larger muscle is a stronger muscle in
all cases. I know somebody will want to
argue with that, but there's just not
true. In fact, there's another study
that I will put in the show notes where
they can do an MRI on your pectorals and
determine with statistical significance,
so with a 95% confidence, what your one
rep maximum of your bench press is just
by doing an MRI on your pectoral. So a
bigger muscle is a stronger muscle for
the most part. Period. However, what I'm
telling you is kind of a hack. You can
stimulate the central nervous system to
fire more muscle and you will have a
slightly higher performing musculature
for a period of time. So that's
important to keep in mind. But for most
of us, we want to build size and
strength and you really want to do that
diminishing range. It gives you the
benefit of fatiguing more with a fresh
muscle.
So you may get the benefit of multiple
sets in that first set because you're
going to momentary muscular fatigue
multiple times with different levels of
force diminishing toward your body. Very
important to understand this. I'm going
to be very repetitive about it. Uh in
some of the other videos, I really want
to get this into people's heads. you
train like this, the people who really
can't or have so much trouble gaining
muscle with regular weights, this will
be like the thing. Like you'll do it and
oh my god, like I'm growing muscle now.
I I was like that for 20 years. I felt
like I was pounding my head against the
wall. And then as I was building this
medical device for bone density, it was
like, oh, if I vary the resistance, I'll
be able to get a greater level of
fatigue. And maybe, just maybe, my
problem is that when I'm in that down
position, stretch position. I'm like
everybody else, and I don't fire much
muscle back here. And that's why I'm not
stimulating much with weights. But if I
vary the resistance and stimulate in
diminishing range, I'm going to
stimulate a whole lot more of the fibers
in the musculature and that's going to
trigger growth as opposed to the
non-growth I was going through not going
through for many many years. So I really
figured this out and built my first
prototype at 40 years old and I've been
using variable resistance. I'm 48 right
now. So made a absolutely tremendous
difference. I have put on about 50 60
lbs of muscle depending on which
measurement tool cuz the measurement
tools for measuring body composition are
lousy at best, but it's pretty obvious.
You know, when you put on 50 or 60 lbs,
like you changed everything about your
body and and everybody notices. It's
phenomenal. So, this is the kind of
thing that is really going to help you
when you're one of those people that's
just a hard gainer. And I want everybody
to focus on what I'm saying. Like, how
do I get variable resistance? You don't
need to buy X3 necessarily. You can
train with bands or chains in in a
regular gym environment. It's kind of
hard to hook all that stuff up because
that regular gym equipment is not
designed for it, but people have figured
it out and and and you can do some
looking or there is X3 available which
makes it really simple and easy. If this
video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.
[Music]